\documentclass[9pt,lineno,doublespacing]{elife}
\usepackage{nameref}
\usepackage{setspace}
\usepackage{booktabs}
\usepackage{colortbl}
\usepackage{mathtools}
\usepackage{siunitx}
\usepackage{tabularx}
\usepackage{todonotes}

% glossaries. Disable the link in main document.
\usepackage[acronym]{glossaries}
\loadglsentries{glossaries}
\usepackage{siunitx}
\DeclareSIUnit\Molar{M}
\glsdisablehyper

\title{Subunit exchange enhances information retention by CaMKII in dendritic spines}

\author[]{Dilawar Singh}
\author[]{Upinder Singh Bhalla}

\affil[]{National Centre for Biological Sciences Bangalore, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research}
\corr{bhalla@ncbs.res.in}{USB}

\presentadd[]{National Centre of Biological Sciences Bangalore
    , Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, India
}

% macros for superscript and subscript.
\newcommand\SUB[2]{#1\textsubscript{#2}}
\newcommand\SUP[2]{#1\textsuperscript{#2}}
% \rowcolors{1}{gray!20}{white}

\begin{document}
\maketitle

% ABSTRACT
\begin{abstract}\label{abstract} 
Molecular bistables are strong candidates for long-term information storage, for
example, in synaptic plasticity. Calcium/calmodulin dependent protein Kinase II
(CaMKII) is a highly expressed synaptic protein which has been proposed to form
a molecular bistable switch capable of maintaining its state for years despite
protein turnover and stochastic noise. It has recently been shown that CaMKII
holoenzymes exchange subunits among themselves. Here we used computational
methods to analyze the effect of subunit exchange on the CaMKII pathway in the
presence of diffusion in two different micro-environments, the Post Synaptic
Density (PSD) and spine cytosol. CaMKII exhibits multiple timescales of activity
and subunit exchange enhances the information retention ability of CaMKII by
improving the stability of its switching in the PSD, and by slowing the decay of
its activity in the spine cytosol. The existence of diverse timescales in the
synapse has important theoretical implications for memory storage in networks.
\end{abstract}



\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}

Memories are believed to be stored in synapses, encoded as changes in synaptic
strength \citep{hebb_organization_2005,takeuchi_synaptic_2014,choi_interregional_2018}.
\gls{ltp}, an activity dependent change in synaptic strength, is considered to
be the primary post-synaptic memory mechanism
\citep{bliss_expression_2013,mayford_synapses_2012}. Various behavioural
experiments strongly suggest a critical role for \gls{camkii} in induction of
\gls{ltp} \citep{lucchesi_novel_2011,giese_autophosphorylation_1998}. In
the CA1 region of Hippocampus, blocking \gls{camkii} activity blocks the
induction of \gls{ltp} \citep{chang_camkii_2017}.  After LTP induction, several
other pathways including protein synthesis \citep{aslam_translational_2009},
clustering of receptors \citep{shouval_clusters_2005}, receptor translocation
\citep{hayer_molecular_2005} and PKM-$\zeta$ activation
\citep{sacktor_memory_2012}, have been suggested as mechanisms for long-term
maintenance of synaptic state. Recent evidence from behavioural assays suggests
that \gls{camkii} may also be involved in long-term maintenance of memory
\citep{rossetti_memory_2017} (but see \citep{chang_camkii_2017}).

Any putative molecular mechanism involved in long-term maintenance of memory
must be able to maintain its state despite the potent resetting mechanisms of
chemical noise and protein turnover.  In the small volume of the synapse ($\sim$
0.02 \si{\micro\meter^3} \citep{bartol_nanoconnectomic_2015}), the number of
molecules involved in biochemical processes range from single digits to a few
hundred, thereby increasing the effect of chemical noise.  Lisman proposed that
a kinase and its phosphatase could form a bistable molecular switch able to
maintain its state for a very long time despite turnover
\citep{lisman_mechanism_1985}. It has been shown by various mathematical models
that \gls{camkii} and its phosphatase \gls{pp1} may form a bistable switch
\citep{zhabotinsky_bistability_2000} which can retain its state for years
despite stochastic chemical noise and protein turnover
\citep{miller_stability_2005}. Although there is experimental evidence that
CaMKII/PP1 is bistable in \emph{in vitro} settings
\citep{bradshaw_ultrasensitive_2003,urakubo_vitro_2014}, experimental evidence
for \emph{in vivo} bistability is lacking. In spine cytosol, \gls{camkii} has
been shown not to act like a bistable switch but rather a leaky integrator of
calcium activity \citep{chang_camkii_2017}.  However, \gls{camkii} may be
bistable in special micro-environments such as the ``core'' \gls{psd} where it
attaches to NMDA receptor \citep{dosemeci_postsynaptic_2016,
petersen_distribution_2003}.

From a computational perspective, the CaMKII/PP1 bistable system is an attractive
candidate for memory storage \citep{koch_biophysics_2004}.  Bistability provides
a plausible solution to the problem of state maintenance. Previous modeling work
has shown that CaMKII/PP1 system may form a very stable switch despite protein
turnover and stochastic noise in the small volume of the synapse.  The stability
increases exponentially with the number of holoenzymes
\citep{miller_stability_2005}. It is important to note that this model exhibits
bistable behaviour only in a narrow range of \gls{pp1} concentrations in the
\gls{psd}. This strict restriction may be met because phosphorylated
\gls{camkii} is protected from phosphatases in \gls{psd} except \gls{pp1}
\citep{strack_differential_1997} which is tightly regulated in the \gls{psd}
\citep{bollen_extended_2010}. 

\gls{camkii} has another remarkable property which was hypothesized by Lisman
\citep{lisman_cam_1994} but discovered only recently, namely, subunit exchange.
In this process, two \gls{camkii} holoenzymes can exchange active subunits
leading to spread of \gls{camkii} activation \citep{stratton_activation-triggered_2014}.

In this paper, we adapt the \gls{mz} \citep{miller_stability_2005} to include
subunit exchange and diffusion, and quantify the effects of subunit exchange on
the properties of the \gls{camkii}-\gls{pp1} PP1 system in two adjacent neuronal
micro-environments: \gls{psd} and spine cytosol. 

In the \gls{psd}, \gls{pp1} is tightly regulated and \gls{camkii} is protected
from other phosphatases. But in the spine cytosol, \gls{camkii} is accessible to
other phosphatases along with \gls{pp1}. We examined how state switching
lifetimes in the \gls{psd} are affected by subunit exchange in different
contexts of \gls{pp1} levels, turnover, and clustering of \gls{camkii}. In the
spine cytosol we show how the integration of calcium stimuli generates two
time-courses of \gls{camkii} activity as a result of subunit exchange
\citep{chang_camkii_2017}.

% RESULTS
\section{Results}\label{sec:results} 

\subsection{Model validation}\label{subsec:model-validation}

The basic computational units in our model are individual \gls{camkii} subunits,
and \gls{camkii} ring consisting of 6 or 7 \gls{camkii} subunits. We treat the
\gls{camkii} ring as a proxy for the \gls{camkii} holoenzyme, which consists of
two such rings stacked over each other
\citep{woodgett_calmodulin-dependent,hoelz_crystal_2003,chao_mechanism_2011}. In
our model, \gls{camkii} exists in 15 possible states compared to 2 in the
\gls{mz} model (see \nameref{sec:materials_and_methods}). This leads to many
more reactions than the \gls{mz} model. Since analytical comparison of the two
models was not possible, we first compared numerical results from our model
without diffusion and without subunit exchange with the \gls{mz} model
(\FIG{validation}).

Our model exhibited all the key properties of the \gls{mz} model: 1. In
\gls{psd}, under basal \gls{ca}  stimulus conditions, CaMKII/PP1 formed a
bistable switch (\FIG{validation}C, D), 2. The stability of the switch increased
exponentially with system size (\FIG{validation}E), 3.  Increased number of
\gls{pp1} molecules (\SUB{N}{PP1}) shut off the switch (\FIG{tolerance_pp1}),
and, 4. Bistability was robust to slow turnover of \gls{camkii}
(\FIG{turnover}).

Thus, our baseline model exhibited all the key properties that have
previously been predicted for the bistable \gls{camkii} switch. However, the
subunit exchange and diffusion introduce several interesting additional
properties, which we examine now.

\begin{figure}[t]%[hbt] 
    % \begin{fullwidth}
    \includegraphics[width=0.95\linewidth]{./PaperFigures/elifeFigure1/figure_validation_178mm.pdf}
    \caption{Model description and validation. \textbf{(A)} CaMKII/PP1
        pathway described in \gls{sbgn} - Process Description (PD) Language \citep{novere_systems_2009}. 
        \textbf{(B)} \textbf{(above)} Major chemical reactions in the CaMKII/PP1 pathway. 
        \textbf{(below)} Subunit exchange between two \gls{camkii} holoenzymes. Red
        and blue balls represent phosphorylated and un-phosphorylated subunits
        respectively.  \textbf{(C)} Basal \gls{ca} profile in spine and
        \gls{psd} in all simulations. Basal \gls{ca} level is \SI{80}{\nano M} with fluctuations
        every \SI{2}{\second}, lasting for \SI{2}{\second}. 
        These fluctuations ($\epsilon$) are sampled from a uniform
        distribution with median of \SI{120}{\nano M} and range  of
        \SI{40}{\nano M} (see \nameref{sec:materials_and_methods}).
        \textbf{(D)} Without diffusion and subunit exchange, CaMKII in our model is bistable.
        Two trajectories of \gls{camkii} activity (fraction of total \gls{camkii}
        holoenzymes with at least 2 subunits phosphorylated) are shown for different system
        size \SUB{N}{CaMKII}=15 (\textbf{top}) and \SUB{N}{CaMKII}=35 (\textbf{bottom}).
        \textbf{(E)} Switch stability measured as average residence time of
        its stable states increases exponentially with system size \SUB{N}{CaMKII}.
        Turnover rate \SUB{v}{t}=\SI{30}{\per \hour}. Panels \textbf{C, D}, and
        \textbf{E} show key properties of our model that are very similar to those of the \gls{mz} 
        model.}\label{fig:validation} 
    \figdata{Source and data are available at
    \url{http://github.com/dilawar/SinghAndBhalla_CaMKII_SubunitExchange_2018/tree/master/PaperFigures/elifeFigure1}}
% \end{fullwidth}
\end{figure}


\subsection{Subunit exchange increases the tolerance of the CaMKII switch to PP1 
and to protein turnover}\label{subsec:result_tolerance}

\begin{figure}[ht]
    \includegraphics[width=140mm]{PaperFigures/elifeFigure2/figure_effect_of_tolerace_140mm.pdf}
    \caption{Subunit exchange improves switch tolerance of \gls{pp1}.
        \textbf{(A)} Two representative trajectories (\SUB{N}{CaMKII}=12) are
        shown with subunit exchange (+SE, blue) and without
        subunit exchange (-SE, red) respectively. \textbf{(B)} Blue and red
        solid-lines represent average activity of switch with and without 
        subunit exchange respectively. The lines are fitted with the 
        function \({a}/\left({1+e^{k(x-x_0)}}\right)\).
        Dotted red and blue lines show the fraction of time that the switch
        spends in intermediate states (\SUB{x}{a}\SUB{y}{n-a}, 1<a<n-1) with
        and without subunit exchange respectively. Due to subunit exchange,
        the switch tolerated a larger amount of \gls{pp1} 
        (\SUB{x}{0} value 11.2 vs 17.77 i.e., a change of 6.57 $\times$ 
        \SUB{N}{CaMKII}). Note that the range 
        of \gls{pp1} for which switch remains bistable is roughly the 
        same (k, 0.6 v/s 0.58). The fraction of time in intermediate states (dotted lines)
	is much smaller when subunit exchange is enabled (blue dotted line),
        i.e., the switching time is shorter. \textbf{(C)} Due to subunit exchange, relaxation 
        time becomes constant and independent of \SUB{N}{PP1} (blue vs red). 
        Shaded area represents standard deviation.
    }\label{fig:tolerance_pp1}
    \figdata{Source and data are available at
    \url{http://github.com/dilawar/SinghAndBhalla_CaMKII_SubunitExchange_2018/tree/master/PaperFigures/elifeFigure2}}
\end{figure}

We first analyzed switch sensitivity to \gls{pp1}. In our model as well in the
\gls{mz} model, the number of PP1 molecules (\SUB{N}{PP1}) has an upper limit
for the switch to exhibit bistability. This constraint arises because \gls{pp1}
must saturate in the \texttt{ON} state of the switch, i.e., the maximal
enzymatic turnover of \gls{pp1} must be smaller than the rate of activation of
\gls{camkii} subunits.  However, unlike the \gls{mz} model where the addition of
one extra \gls{pp1} molecule changed the residence time of \texttt{ON} state by
roughly 90\% (Figure~2C in \citep{miller_stability_2005}), we did not find
residence time of \texttt{ON} state to be this sensitive to \gls{pp1}. In our
model, on average it required 0.5$\times$\SUB{N}{CaMKII} extra \gls{pp1}
molecules to cause a 90\% change in the residence time of \texttt{ON} state.
This number is roughly equal to the maximum number of \gls{camkii} subunits
(released from \gls{camkii} holoenzymes during subunit exchange \EQ{losegainx})
that can exist at any given time in our model. Due to this numerical fact, we
conjecture that this reduced sensitivity to \gls{pp1} is due to the increased
number of \gls{pp1} reactions, as well as replacement of Michaelis-Menten
approximation in the \gls{mz} model by equivalent mass-action kinetics in our
model (\EQ{dephosphorylation}). 

We found that a system consisting of \SUB{N}{CaMKII} holoenzymes remained
bistable for \SUB{N}{PP1}=8$\times$ to 15$\times$\SUB{N}{CaMKII} without subunit
exchange, and for \SUB{N}{PP1}=12$\times$ to 21$\times$\SUB{N}{CaMKII} with
subunit exchange. Thus, subunit exchange shifted the bistable range to higher
values of \gls{pp1}. Nevertheless, the ratio of upper and lower limit remained
the same in both cases (blue and red sigmoidal fit in \FIG{tolerance_pp1}B).  In
the presence of subunit exchange, any subunit de-phosphorylated by \gls{pp1} is
quickly phosphorylated back as evident by tighter distribution of \texttt{ON}
state (blue v/s red histogram, \FIG{tolerance_pp1}A). Taken together, subunit
exchange acts as a compensatory mechanism for dephosphorylation by \gls{pp1}.

Subunit exchange also had a strong effect on time spent by the switch in
transition from one stable state to another (relaxation time). When subunit
exchange was enabled, the relaxation time was reduced (red v/s blue dotted line
in \FIG{tolerance_pp1}B) and also became independent of \SUB{N}{PP1}. Due to
subunit exchange, the \texttt{ON} state has tighter distribution (blue v/s red
histogram in \FIG{tolerance_pp1}A) which means that there were fewer number of
ineffective transition from \texttt{ON} to \texttt{OFF} state.  Expectedly the
standard deviation of the relaxation time was also greatly reduced in the
presence of subunit exchange (red and blue curve, \FIG{tolerance_pp1}C). 

Parallel results were obtained for the effect of subunit exchange on
\gls{camkii} switch robustness in the context of protein turnover.  Turnover
replace any active \gls{camkii} holoenzyme  by an inactive holoenzyme with a
constant rate (\EQ{turnover}). Turnover decreases the stability of \texttt{ON}
state. Without subunit exchange, switch stability as measured by residence time
of the \texttt{ON} state decreased exponentially with increasing turnover rate.
With subunit exchange, however, residence time of \texttt{ON} state remained
roughly constant upto a $\sim$10 fold increase in turnover (\FIG{turnover}B),
after which subunit exchange could not phosphorylate all inactive holoenzymes
produced by turnover, and the switch started to show exponential decay of
stability. As expected, turnover increased the number of switching events in the
regime of bistability in both cases.

\begin{figure}[th!]
    \includegraphics[width=114mm]{./PaperFigures/elifeFigure3/figure_turnover_tolerance_114.pdf}
    \caption{Subunit exchange improves switch tolerance of higher rates of
        protein turnover.
        \textbf{(A,B)} Three sample trajectories are shown for a switch of 
        size \SUB{N}{CaMKII}=10 without subunit exchange
        (-SE,red) and with it (+SE,blue). We consider three different 
        turnover rates of 1 per \SI{30}{\hour}, 1 per \SI{3}{\hour}, 
        and 1 per 0.5 \si{\hour}. As turnover is increased, the state stability 
        of the \texttt{ON} state of the switch decreases.
        \textbf{(C, left)} Normalized residence time of \texttt{ON} state vs. turnover
        rate for two switches of size 6 and 12. Without subunit exchange, switch
        stability decreases exponentially with turnover rate (red), however when
        subunit exchange is enabled, switch stability is not affected by
        turnover rates as high as \SI{1}{\per \hour} (blue). \textbf{(C,right)} In
        the bistable regime (solid lines), the number of switching events
        increases monotonically with turnover rate.
    }\label{fig:turnover}
    \figdata{Source and data are available at
    \url{http://github.com/dilawar/SinghAndBhalla_CaMKII_SubunitExchange_2018/tree/master/PaperFigures/elifeFigure3}}
\end{figure}

Thus, subunit exchange increases the range of \SUB{N}{PP1} and turnover rate 
over which the switch remains bistable. 

\subsection{Subunit exchange facilitates the spread of CaMKII activity}
\label{res:spread_activity}

As suggested in \citep{stratton_activation-triggered_2014}, we found that
subunit exchange facilitates spread of \gls{camkii} activation
(\FIG{subunit_facilitates_spread}). When subunits were allowed to diffuse, they
could be picked by neighbouring inactive \gls{camkii} holoenzymes.  This
effectively overcame the first slow step of \gls{camkii} phosphorylation
(\EQ{phospho}) thereby facilitating the spread of activation.

We put \SUB{N}{CaMKII}=18 inactive holoenzymes in a cylinder with the volume of
\SI{0.0275}{\cubic\micro\meter} and the length of \SI{540}{\nano\meter}
representing the \gls{psd}. The cylinder was divided into 18 voxels (1
holoenzyme in each voxel). Each voxel was separated by \SI{30}{\nano\meter},
which is the average nearest-neighbour distance for \gls{camkii} holoenzymes
\citep{feng_quantitative_2011}.  Each voxel was considered to be a
\emph{well-mixed} environment i.e., diffusion was instantaneous within the
voxel. Between voxel, diffusion was implemented as cross-voxel ``jump''
reactions (See \nameref{sec:materials_and_methods}).  We did not try 2D/3D
diffusion because of its simulation complexity and because it would be expected
to be qualitatively similar \citep{fange_stochastic_2010}.

We fixed the diffusion coefficient of \gls{pp1} (\SUB{D}{PP1}) to quantify the
effect of varying the diffusion coefficient of subunits (\SUB{D}{sub}) and basal
calcium levels. We used \SUB{D}{PP1}=\SI{0.5}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second}
which is the observed value of the diffusion coefficient of Ras, a similar sized
protein \citep{harvey_spread_2008}. We ran simulations for 4 hours at basal
calcium concentration [\gls{ca}]=\SI{80}{\nano M}+$\epsilon$ and without subunit
exchange (i.e., \SUB{D}{sub}=0). We set \SUB{N}{PP1}=15$\times$\SUB{N}{CaMKII}
to make sure the system shows no significant \gls{camkii} activity
(\FIG{subunit_facilitates_spread}A, red curve). This served as the baseline to
quantify the effect of subunit exchange. When we enabled subunit exchange by
setting \SUB{D}{sub}=\SI{0.1}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second}, \gls{camkii}
activity rose to maximum within \SI{4}{\hour}
(\FIG{subunit_facilitates_spread}AB, black curve). Expectedly, at higher basal
\gls{ca} level (\SI{120}{\nano M}), system showed higher \gls{camkii} activity
for all values of \SUB{D}{sub} (compare \FIG{subunit_facilitates_spread}B and
C). Increasing \SUB{D}{sub} increased the effect of subunit exchange (decreased
rise time of \gls{camkii} activity, \FIG{subunit_facilitates_spread}D,E).

Thus, subunit exchange facilitates the spread of kinase activity at short time
scale.

\begin{figure}
    \includegraphics[width=0.95\linewidth]{./PaperFigures/elifeFigure4/figure_camkii_activation_130mm.pdf}
    \caption{Subunit exchange facilitates the spread of kinase activity
        \citep{stratton_activation-triggered_2014}. \textbf{(A)} 18 \gls{camkii} holoenzymes were put in
        a cylinder of volume \SI{0.0275}{\cubic\micro\meter} discretized into 18
        voxels, each separated by \SI{30}{\nano\meter}. Red and blue balls
        represent active and inactive subunits respectively.  For all
        simulations \SUB{D}{PP1}=\SI{0.5}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second}.
        \textbf{(B)} Activation profile of \gls{camkii} at mean basal calcium
        level of \SI{80}{\nano M} (\FIG{validation}C) and
        \SUB{N}{PP1}=15$\times$\SUB{N}{CaMKII} for various values of
        \SUB{D}{sub}. When subunits diffused with zero or negligible coefficient
        (\SUB{D}{sub}=0 and \SUB{D}{sub}=\SI{e-8}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second})
        , mean activity of \gls{camkii} is negligible. For \SUB{D}{sub}=\SI{0.001} and
        \SI{0.1}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second}, the mean \gls{camkii}
        activity reached its maximum within \SI{4}{\hour}.  \textbf{(C)}
        \gls{camkii} activates faster at higher mean basal calcium level of
        \SI{100}{\nano M}. \textbf{(D)} The time taken by \gls{camkii} to rise
        from 10\% to 90\% of its maximum value (rise time) in hours v/s
        \SUB{D}{sub} for different mean basal calcium levels. The effect of
        subunit exchange is more prominent at higher calcium levels for all
        values of \SUB{D}{sub}, and stronger (decreasing rise time) for larger
        \SUB{D}{sub} for all values of \gls{ca} level. 40 trajectories were
        generated for each trace. Error bars represents standard deviation.
        \textbf{(E)} The onset of activity time (in hours) v/s \SUB{D}{sub},
        where onset of activity time is measured as the time taken by inactive
        \gls{camkii} to rise from zero to 10\% of its maximum value. Average
        time for onset of activity decreased with increasing basal \gls{ca} level
        but remained independent of \SUB{D}{sub}. Error bar represents standard
        deviation.  
    }\label{fig:subunit_facilitates_spread} 
% first suppl
\figsupp[Sample trajectories of
\gls{camkii} activation for basal \gls{ca} concentration of \SI{100}{\nano
    M}.]{In all simulations, \SUB{D}{PP1} is fixed to
\SI{0.1}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second} and \SUB{D}{sub} was varied. Each plot
contains 40 trajectories. Dark black trajectory in each plot shows the average
of all 40 trajectories.
}{\includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{./PaperFigures/suppl/figure_camkii_activations_trajs.pdf}}
\label{figsupp:camkii_activation_se_trajs} 
\figdata{Source and data are available at
\url{http://github.com/dilawar/SinghAndBhalla_CaMKII_SubunitExchange_2018/tree/master/PaperFigures/elifeFigure4}}
\end{figure}


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% Spread of activity and synchronization

\subsection{Subunit exchange synchronizes switching activity of clustered CaMKII}
\label{subsec:se_sync_switches}

\begin{figure}%[t]%[bth] 
    \includegraphics[width=0.9\linewidth]{./PaperFigures/elifeFigure5/figure_sync_150mm.pdf}
    \caption{In \gls{psd}, subunit exchange synchronizes activity of
        \gls{camkii} clusters. \textbf{(A)} 3 clusters of N\textsubscript{CaMKII}=6 
        separated by distance \(d\) were put in a cylinderical arena
        of volume \SI{0.0275}{\micro\meter^3} discretized into 3 voxels, each
        separated by \(d\). \Gls{camkii} subunits are shown as red (active) and
        blue (inactive) balls. Subunits and \gls{pp1} (not shown) were allowed to diffuse along
        the axis. \textbf{(B)} Without subunit exchange, all three switches
        flipped independently i.e., state distribution on right is binomial when bin size is \SUB{N}{CaMKII}
        (left, red). With subunit exchange, all switches synchronized their activity
        i.e., population acted as a single bistable switch (right, blue).  \textbf{(C)}
        Strength of synchronization (k\textsubscript{s}) v/s diffusion
        coefficient \SUB{D}{sub} for a system of 3 switches separated from each
        other by a distance \SI{30}{\nano \meter}.
        $k_s=1-t_i$ where $t_i$ is fraction of time
        spent by switches in intermediate states
        x\textsubscript{a}y\textsubscript{n-a}; 1\textless{}a\textless{}n.
        Synchronization is strong for k\textsubscript{s} \textgreater{} 0.4.
        \textbf{(D)} Phase plot of \SUB{k}{s} v/s \SUB{D}{sub} and d. The effect
        of synchronization \SUB{k}{s} due to subunit exchange is strong (red
        region) and robust to changes in \SUB{D}{sub}, and strong for $d$ as large as
        \SI{100}{\nano\meter}. \SUB{D}{PP1}=\SI{0.5}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second}
        for all simulations.}\label{fig:sync_spread}
    \figdata{Source and data are available at
    \url{http://github.com/dilawar/SinghAndBhalla_CaMKII_SubunitExchange_2018/tree/master/PaperFigures/elifeFigure5}}
\end{figure}

Next we probed the effect of subunit exchange between spatially separated
\gls{camkii} clusters at longer timescales. We considered \SUB{N}{CaMKII}
holoenzymes organized into three clusters of size \SUB{N}{CaMKII}/3, each
separated by a distance \(d\). This configuration corresponds to cases where
receptors and \gls{camkii} holoenzymes are clustered at the synapse. 

When there is no subunit exchange across voxels i.e., \SUB{D}{sub}=0, these
switches are expected to switch independently like multiple coins flipped
together, resulting in a binomial distribution of activity. The clustered system
had 3 relatively stable bistable systems (long residence time,
\FIG{validation}E). As expected, without subunit exchange, activity in this
system had a binomial distribution (\FIG{sync_spread}B, red plot). 

Then we allowed \gls{pp1} and \gls{camkii} subunits to undergo linear diffusion.
We fixed \SUB{D}{PP1}=\SI{0.5}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second} as before and
varied \SUB{D}{sub} to quantify effect of subunit exchange.  Subunit exchange
led to synchronization of switching activity. The population of clustered
\gls{camkii} acted as a single bistable switch (\FIG{sync_spread}B, blue plot).
This effect was strong and robust to variation in \SUB{D}{sub}. Even for a very
small value of \SUB{D}{sub}=\SI{0.01}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second}, we
observed strong synchronization (\FIG{sync_spread}D). The synchronization
disappeared completely for \SUB{D}{sub} less than
\SI{e-4}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second}, and  for $d$ less than
\SI{30}{\nano\meter} (\FIG{sync_spread}D).

Thus, for most physiologically plausible values of diffusion coefficient
\SUB{D}{sub}, subunit exchange causes synchronization of switching activity of
clustered \gls{camkii}.

%%%% Dual decay rate of CaMKII. %%%%%%%%%
\subsection{Subunit exchange may account for the observed dual decay rate of
    CaMKII phosphorylation}\label{subsec:camkii_decay_two_time_course}

Finally, we asked if subunit exchange might account for the complex time-course
of \gls{camkii} dynamics in spine as observed in recent experiments
\citep{chang_camkii_2017}. We designed a simulation to replicate an experiment
where \gls{camkii} was inhibited by a genetically encoded photoactivable
inhibitory peptide after activating \gls{camkii} by glutamate uncaging
\citep{murakoshi_kinetics_2017}. In the spine, \gls{camkii} is more accessible
to phosphatases than in the \gls{psd}, where our previous calculations had been
located. To model the increased availability of phosphatases, we increased the
concentration of \gls{pp1} by an order of magnitude, and increased the volume of
the compartment to match the volume of a typical spine head i.e.,
\SI{0.02}{\cubic\micro\meter} \citep{bartol_nanoconnectomic_2015}. We found that
CaMKII acted as a leaky integrator of the calcium activity with a typical
exponential decay dynamics (\FIG{cytosol_integrator}A). We then enabled the
diffusion of \gls{camkii} subunits
(\SUB{D}{sub}=\SI{1}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second}) and \gls{pp1}
(\SUB{D}{PP1}=\SI{0.5}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second}). These conditions
decreased the rate of dephosphorylation roughly by a factor of 5
(\SI{41.65}{\second} v/s \SI{200.82}{\second}) (\FIG{cytosol_integrator}B). 

\begin{figure}%[t]%[tbh]
    \includegraphics[width=11.4cm]{PaperFigures/elifeFigure6/figure_two_timecourses_114mm.pdf}
    \caption{ In \gls{pp1} rich spine cytosol, \gls{camkii} acts as a leaky integrator of \gls{ca} 
        activity. As clustered \gls{camkii} population decays much slowly due
        to subunit exchange, a mixed population of clustered and non-clustered \gls{camkii}
        can explain observed two time-constants of \gls{camkii} decay \citep{chang_camkii_2017}.
        \textbf{(A)} Trajectories of \gls{camkii} activity (fraction of total \gls{camkii})
        are shown when a strong periodic \gls{ca} pulse of \SI{3}{\second}
        duration was applied to the system after every \SI{1000}{\second} ($\downarrow$).
        After the pulse, \gls{ca} levels were brought down to \SI{80}{\nano M}. 
        Three trajectories are shown: without subunit exchange (red), with
        subunit exchange (blue), and a weighed sum of red and blue (74\%
        red + 24\% blue as estimated in \citep{chang_camkii_2017}). 
        \textbf{(B)} Average decay dynamics after the onset of strong \gls{ca} pulse ($\downarrow$). 
        When there is no subunit exchange, \gls{camkii} decays at timescale of
        approximately \SI{41.65}{\second} (dashed yellow). When subunit exchange is enabled, 
        \gls{camkii} decay has larger time-constant of $\SI{200.82}{\second}$ (dashed blue). 
        \textbf{(C)} Dynamics of mixed population (black, raw data shown in
        black in \textbf{A}). Fit of mixed population by a double
        exponential i.e. $ae^{-t/\tau_{1}}+(1-a)e^{-t/\tau_{2}}$ for
        $a=0.74$ (dashed red). Time constants $\tau_1$ and $\tau_2$ are estimated to be \SI{8.4}{\second} and
        \SI{86.2}{\second} respectively. 
        Function $0.74e^{-t/6.4}+0.26e^{-t/92.6}$ is the best fit of
        experimental activity estimated in \citep{chang_camkii_2017} (magenta). 
        For a given $a=0.74$ (estimated in \citep{chang_camkii_2017}), our time-constants
        (\SI{8.4}{\second}, \SI{86.2}{\second}) matches well with experimentally
        estimated time-constants (\SI{6.4}{\second}$\pm$0.7, \SI{92.6}{\second}$\pm$50.7). 
        Shaded areas are the standard deviation. $N_{v}=10$,
        \SUB{D}{sub}=\SI{1}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second},
        \SUB{D}{PP1}=\SI{0.5}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second}.
        All fits were performed using 
        \href{https://gnuplot.info}{Gnuplot} (version 5.2.4).
    }\label{fig:cytosol_integrator}
\figdata{Source and data are available at
\url{http://github.com/dilawar/SinghAndBhalla_CaMKII_SubunitExchange_2018/tree/master/PaperFigures/elifeFigure6}}
\end{figure}

We expected subunit exchange to have a strong effect on the decay activity of
clustered \gls{camkii} in spine cytosol (e.g., \gls{camkii} bound to actin)
because of the proximity of holoenzymes, leading to rapid exchange.  Our
simulations supported this prediction. If there are populations of clustered as
well as non-clustered \gls{camkii} in the spine, we expect that they will
exhibit long and short time-courses of activity decay. Therefore a mixed
population of clustered and non-clustered \gls{camkii} will decay with two
time-constants. 

In \cite{chang_camkii_2017}, the decay kinetics of \gls{camkii} was obtained by
curve fitting of experimental data. It is given by a double-exponential
function: $F(t)=P_{fast}e^{-t/\tau_{fast}}+P_{slow}e^{-t/\tau_{slow}}$ where
$P_{fast}=0.74, P_{slow}=0.26,  \tau_{fast}= 6.4\pm0.7 \si{\second},
\tau_{slow}=92.6 \pm 50.7\si{\second}$ (\FIG{cytosol_integrator}C, magenta).  We
used their estimate of $P_{fast}$ and $P_{slow}$ to construct a mixed population
of slow and fast decaying \gls{camkii} (\FIG{cytosol_integrator}A, black) and
estimated a double-exponential function which fits it
(\FIG{cytosol_integrator}C, dashed red). The time-constants obtained
(\SI{8.4}{\second}, \SI{86.2}{\second}) matches well with experimentally
estimated time-constants (\SI{6.4}{\second}$\pm$0.7,
\SI{92.6}{\second}$\pm$50.7). 

Thus, we suggest that subunit exchange may be a mechanism that leads to
\gls{camkii}$\alpha$ activity decaying with two time-courses in spine 
cytosol.

% DISCUSSION
\section{Discussion}\label{discussion}

Here we have shown that subunit exchange strongly affects the properties of
CaMKII/PP1 pathway, both in its role as a bistable switch in PSD and as a leaky
integrator of \gls{ca} activity in spine cytosol. In the PSD, where the model
was tuned to elicit bistable dynamics from clustered \gls{camkii}, subunit
exchange improved the stability of \gls{camkii}/\gls{pp1} switch by
synchronizing the kinase activity across PSD (\FIG{cytosol_integrator}). It also
improved active \gls{camkii} tolerance of PP1 and turnover rate
(\FIG{tolerance_pp1} and \FIG{turnover}). In the case where \gls{camkii} was
uniformly distributed in \gls{psd}, subunit exchange facilitated more rapid
activation of \gls{camkii} (\FIG{subunit_facilitates_spread}BCD)
\citep{stratton_activation-triggered_2014}. These simulation results predict
that a \gls{camkii} mutant lacking subunit exchange would be deficient in switch
stability and slower to activate thereby resulting in degraded memory retention
and deficient learning in memory related behavioural experiments, respectively.

In the spine head, subunit exchange facilitated integration by prolonging the
decay time-course of kinase activity (\FIG{cytosol_integrator}).  The fact that
\gls{camkii} dynamics changed from an integrator to bistable switch as we moved
from spine cytosol (a phosphatase rich environment) to the \gls{psd} (where PP1
is tightly controlled) suggests an interesting sub-compartmentalization of
functions in these microdomains. Furthermore, we observed that the clustering of
\gls{camkii} had important implications for its sustained activity.

Subunit exchange is unlikely to have any impact on neighbouring spines. The mean
escape time of a single \gls{camkii} subunit from a typical spine is between
\SI{8}{\second} to \SI{33}{\second} \citep{holcman_diffusion_2011}. In a real
synapse, this time would be even larger given that \gls{camkii} interacts with
many other molecules. Any phosphorylated subunit is almost certain to be
de-phosphorylated by \gls{pp1} during this time. We therefore predict that the
effects of synchronization are local to each \gls{psd}, where \gls{pp1} is known
to be tightly controlled.  Subunit exchange loses its potency in the phosphatase
rich region of the bulk spine head or dendrite. We therefore consider it
unlikely that \gls{camkii} subunit exchange plays any role in intra-spine
information exchange such as synaptic tagging.

\Gls{camkii} is non uniformly distributed in \gls{psd} where it is mostly
concentrated in a small region of \SI{16}{\nano \meter} to \SI{36}{\nano \meter}
below synaptic cleft \citep{petersen_distribution_2003}. In \gls{psd},
\gls{camkii} may exist in large clusters given that \gls{psd} is rich in
\gls{camkii} binding partners.  Our study predicts that subunit exchange may
lead to synchronization when \gls{camkii} is clustered, or more rapid activation
by \gls{ca} when it is uniformly distributed. Given that \gls{camkii} can form
clusters with \gls{nmda} receptors, it would be interesting to study the mixed
case where some \gls{camkii} is clustered and rest is uniformly distributed.
This would require detailed 3D simulation and is beyond the scope of this study.

Finally, we suggest that existence of diverse time-scales of \gls{camkii}
activity -- bistable and highly stable synchronized bistable in PSD, slow and
fast decaying leaky integrator in spine head -- has important theoretical
implications. A very plastic synapse is good at registering activity dependent
changes (learning) but bad at retaining old memories. On the other hand, a rigid
synapse is good at retaining old memories but is not efficient at learning. A
theoretical meta-model which sought to strike a balance between these two
competing demands requires that such diversity of timescales must exist at the
synapse \citep{benna_computational_2016} for optimum performance. In this model,
complex synapses with state variables with diverse time-scales are shown to form
a memory network in which storage capacity scales linearly with number of
synapses, and memory decay follows \(1/\sqrt{t}\) --- a power-law supported by
psychological studies \citep{wixted_form_1991}. This model requires memory trace
to be first stored in a fast variable and then progressively and efficiently
transferred to slower variables.  Our study suggests a concrete mechanism for
such a process. Here, \gls{ca} concentration in PSD can be mapped to the fastest
variable.  The \gls{camkii} integrator in cytosol could represent the second
slower variable to which the trace is transferred from \gls{ca}. Further, the
state information is transferred to the third slower \gls{camkii} bistable
switch. The dynamics of \gls{camkii} in the PSD forms an even slower bistable
variable for longer retention of the memory trace. It is possible that memory is
transferred from here to even slower variables, such as sustained receptor
insertion \citep{hayer_molecular_2005}, PKM-$\zeta$ activation
\citep{sacktor_memory_2012}, or local protein synthesis
\citep{aslam_translational_2009}.

% MATERIALS AND METHODS
\section{Methods and Materials}{\label{sec:materials_and_methods} 

We extended Miller and Zhabotinksy (MZ model) \citep{miller_stability_2005} to
incorporate \emph{subunit exchange} and diffusion. We assume that vertical
dimers are inserted and released together \citep{bhattacharyya_molecular_2016}.
We also assume that both subunits of a vertical dimer phosphorylate and
de-phosphorylate together. Under this assumption, we can treat the \gls{camkii}
ring as the proxy for the \gls{camkii} holoenzyme and the subunit as the proxy
for the \gls{camkii} dimer. Without this assumption, the simulation cost of the
increased complexity would be very significant. The qualitative aspect of model
behaviour will be the same with or without this assumption. If we further assume
that phosphorylation of either of the subunits or both the subunits are equally
effective for the release of a dimer from a holoenzyme, and dimer's
effectiveness to phosphorylate neighbouring subunits in both rings remains same
after it is picked up by another holoenzyme then this assumption is unlikely to
cause large quantitative difference. 

In our model, a \gls{camkii} ring with $n$ subunits ($n$=6 or 7) can exist
in 15 different states enumerated as $x_{a}y_{n-a}$ for $0 \le a \le n$ where
$x$ and $y$ represents un-phosphorylated and phosphorylated subunits
respectively. We ignore all rotational permutations and kinetically unlikely
cases where there are discontiguous phosphorylated subunits in the ring. We
assumed that the phosphorylation of neighbouring subunit proceeds clockwise.

\subsection{\SUP{Ca}{2+} background activity $\epsilon$}\label{subsec:calcium_background}

We assumed the resting \gls{ca} level in spine to be \SI{80}{\nano M}
\citep{berridge_neuronal_1998}. In \gls{mz} model, Miller et. al. assumed that
\gls{ca} entry through \gls{nmda} receptors can be approximated by a Poisson
train with an average rate of \SI{0.5}{Hz}.  Since $\sim$0.5 \gls{nmda}
receptors are open on average \citep{nimchinsky_number_2004}, we reduced the
frequency of NMDA opening events to \SI{0.25}{Hz}. We used a periodic pulse with
time-period of \SI{4}{\second} and duty cycle of 50\% instead of a Poisson train
since sparse sampling (once in few 1 to 10 seconds) from either of them will
produce similar statistics for long simulation time used here. 

To model NMDA activity in \SI{2}{\second} long \texttt{ON} period of our
\SI{4}{\second} long periodic pulse, we sampled from a uniform distribution with
median of \SI{120}{\nano M} (50\% change, on average) and range of \SI{40}{\nano
M} (\FIG{validation}C). This distribution is informed by figure 2B,C from
\citep{nimchinsky_number_2004}.

We did not consider decay dynamics of \gls{ca} influx through \gls{nmda} channel
since including the timescale of decay (roughly \SI{100}{\milli\second}) would
have made simulations very slow. The effect of ignoring decay dynamics are
expected to be negligible given the time-scale of \gls{camkii} activation is
much larger than the time course of \gls{ca} decay dynamics.  We did not
consider contributions to background \gls{ca} fluctuations by other channels.
This background activity is represented by $\epsilon$ in other figures.

\subsection{Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of CaMKII ring}
\label{phosphorylation-and-dephosphorylation-of-ring} 

The activation of \gls{camkii} follows the same dynamics as in \gls{mz} model
(\EQ{phospho}).  The first step in \gls{camkii} activation requires simultaneous
binding of two \gls{cacam} to the two adjacent subunits of \gls{camkii}. Once a
subunit is phosphorylated (\SUP{Thr}{286}), it catalyzes phosphorylation of it's
neighbour (\emph{auto-phosphorylation}) which requires binding of only one
\gls{cacam}. Therefore, further phosphorylation proceeds at much faster rate.
The phosphorylation of \gls{camkii} (\SUP{Thr}{286}) is given by \EQ{phospho}
\citep{bradshaw_ultrasensitive_2003,miller_stability_2005}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:phospho}
    \newcommand\CaHILL{\ensuremath{\frac{Ca^{2+}}{K_{H1}}}}
    \newcommand\VONE{k_1 \left[\frac{H^3}{1+H^3}\right]^2}
    \newcommand\VTWO{k_1\frac{H^3}{1+H ^3}}
\begin{gathered}
    x_ay_{n-a} \xrightarrow{v_1} x_{a-1}y_{n-a+1} \xrightarrow{v_2} x_{a-2}y_{n-a+2} \\
    v_1 = \VONE,\, v_2 =\VTWO,\,\text{where}\; H=\CaHILL
\end{gathered}
\end{equation} where $n=6\;\text{or}\;7$, and $1\le a \le n$. 

Once fully phosphorylated, \gls{camkii} moves to \gls{psd} where it binds to
\gls{nmda} receptor. Upon binding, it is no longer accessible other phosphatases
save \gls{pp1}.

The dephosphorylation of the \gls{camkii} ring, and the subunit follow a
Michaelis-Menten like scheme \EQ{dephosphorylation}. We implemented this 
as coupled mass-action chemical reactions.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:dephosphorylation} 
    \begin{gathered} 
        PP1 + x_ay_{n-a} \xrightleftharpoons[k^-]{k^+} PP1.x_ay_{n-a} 
            \xrightarrow{k_2} PP1 + x_{a+1}y_{n-a-1} \\ 
        PP1 + x \xrightleftharpoons[k^-]{k^+} PP1.x \xrightarrow{k_2} PP1 + y 
    \end{gathered}
\end{equation}

\noindent where $n=6\;\text{or}\;7$, and $1\le a \le n$. Following Miller et al.
\citep{miller_stability_2005}, we also assumed $k^-=0$. This gave us
$k^+=\frac{k_2}{k_M}=\SI{1}{\per\micro M\per\second}$. We could not find any
experimental estimate of the value of $k_M$, therefore we used the same value of $k_M$ 
used in the \gls{mz} model \citep{miller_stability_2005}.

\subsection{Subunit exchange}\label{subunit exchange} 

Since \gls{camkii} ring consists of either 6 or 7 subunits exists in our model,
any ring with 6 subunits cannot lose a subunit, and a ring with 7 subunits
cannot gain a subunit. The reactions which result in either gain or lose of a
subunit are given by \EQ{losegainx} where $0\le a \le 6\text{ or }7$.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:losegainx}
    \begin{gathered}
    x_ay_{7-a} + x \xrightleftharpoons[k^-_x]{k^+_x} x_{a+1}y_{6-a} \\
    x_ay_{6-a} + y \xrightleftharpoons[k^-_y]{k^+_y} x_{a}y_{7-a}
    \end{gathered}
\end{equation}

The values of $k_x^+$, $k_x^-$, $k_y^+$, and $k_y^-$ are not available in the
literature that we are aware of. We used the data in
\citep{stratton_activation-triggered_2014} to estimate the possible timescale of
subunit exchange rate. Bhattacharya \textit{et al}.
\citep{bhattacharyya_molecular_2016} speculate that upon activation, the hub of
holoenzyme becomes less stable and more likely to open up and lose a subunit
i.e., active holoenzyme loses a subunit faster. Therefore, we maintained the
following ratio \(k_x^- \approx 10 k_x^+ N_{\text{CaMKII}}\) and \(k_y^- \approx
10 k_y^+ N_{\text{CaMKII}}\) in all simulations where \SUB{N}{CaMKII} is the
number of holoenzymes in the system.  

% Estimation of subunit exchange rate.
\subsubsection{Estimation of subunit exchange rate}\label{subsec:estimate_exchange_rate}

To estimate reaction rates of \EQ{losegainx}, we modeled the "single molecule
assay" from \cite{stratton_activation-triggered_2014} (Figure 2). In this assay,
two distinct populations of \gls{camkii} labelled by green and red fluorophores
were mixed together. A green holoenzyme may pick up a red subunit and vice versa
thereby giving rise to a mixed colored population. The readout from this assay
is called ``cololocalization'' which is the fraction of total holoenzymes
containing subunits of both colors.

In our model of this assay, a \gls{camkii} holoenzyme is represented by
$R_aG_{n-a}$ where $n=6\;\text{or}\;7$. The green population consists of
holoenzymes with only green subunits ($R_0G_6$ and $R_0G_7$) and the red
population has holoenzymes with all red subunits (all $R_6G_0$ or $R_7G_0$).  We
assume that each color population has equal number of dodecameric (n=6) and
tetradecameric (n=7) holoenzymes. Upon mixing red and green populations,
following reactions (\EQ{mixing_assay}) take place.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:mixing_assay}
    \begin{gathered}
        R_aG_b \xrightleftharpoons[r_l]{r_g} R_{a-1}G_b + R 
        \quad \text{for all}\; a>0,b\ge 0\; \text{s.t.}\; a+b=7 \\
        R_aG_b \xrightleftharpoons[r_l]{r_g} R_{a}G_{b-1} + G 
        \quad \text{for all}\; a\ge 0,b> 0\; \text{s.t.}\; a+b=7
    \end{gathered}
\end{equation}

The value of colocalization is the percentage of holoenzymes with at least one
red and one green subunit in it i.e. $\frac{\sum_{a\ge 1, b \ge 1} [R_aG_b]}{
\sum_{a\ge0,b \ge 0}[R_aG_b]}$. We simulate the reaction network given by
\EQ{mixing_assay} for various values of $r_l$ and $r_g$
(\FIG{estimate_of_exchange_rate}B) to estimate the values of rate constants
$r_g$ and $r_l$ which describe the data in
\cite{stratton_activation-triggered_2014} well for the given \gls{camkii}
concentration. Our value of $k_x^+, k_y^+, k_x^-, k_y^-$ are close to estimated
values of $r_g$ and $r_l$ (red cross v/s black dots in
\FIG{estimate_of_exchange_rate}B). 

For typical values of $r_g$ and $r_l$ used in our simulations, we computed the
colocalization dynamics in our model at two different \gls{camkii}
concentrations i.e. \gls{camkii}=\SI{8}{\micro M} and \SI{1}{\micro M}
(\FIG{estimate_of_exchange_rate}D). When compared with data from
\cite{stratton_activation-triggered_2014}, our model captures the time-scale and
concentration dependant decrease in the rate of colocalization reasonably well.
Note that we do not model effect of diffusion, labelling efficiency, and
experimental errors in readout mechanism.  

\begin{figure}[ht!]
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{./PaperFigures/elifeFigure8/figure_exchange_rate.pdf}
    \caption{Estimate of subunit exchange rate. \textbf{(A)} Colocalization
        dynamics as reported in \cite{stratton_activation-triggered_2014} at
        \gls{camkii}=\SI{8}{\micro M} (blue dots). Solid blue line shows a best
        fit $100(1-e^{-t/\tau})$ with $\tau$=\SI{62.7}{min}. \textbf{(B)} Phase
        plot of $\tau$ of colocalization trajectories generated for various
        values of $r_g$ and $r_l$ (\EQ{mixing_assay}). Black does shows values
        of $r_g$ and $r_l$ for which $\tau=62.7\pm 20\% (S.E.M.)$. Red Red
        circled plus marks shows the typical values of rate constants
        (\EQ{losegainx}) used in this study. \textbf{(C)} Timescale of subunit
        exchange are concentration dependant. For fixed value of $r_g$ and
        $r_l$, three trajectories are shown for different \gls{camkii}
        concentration. As seen in experimental data, rate of colocalization
        increases with increasing \gls{camkii} concentration. \textbf{(D)} For
        typical values of exchange rate used in this paper, we plotted
        simulation results (solid lines) with experimental values (dots).
    }\label{fig:estimate_of_exchange_rate}
\end{figure}



\subsection{PP1 deactivation}\label{subsec:pp1_deactivation} 

In the \gls{psd}, \gls{pp1} is the primary -- and perhaps only -- phosphatase
known to dephosphorylate \gls{camkii} \citep{strack_translocation_1997}.  We
followed \gls{mz} model for \EQ{i1pandpp1} where \gls{i1} inactivates \gls{pp1}. 
\Gls{i1p} renders \gls{pp1} inactive by forming \gls{i1ppp1}. 

\begin{equation}\label{eq:i1pandpp1}
    \begin{gathered}
        PP1 + I1P \xrightleftharpoons[k_4]{k_3} I1P.PP1 \\
        I1P = I1 \frac{v_{PKA}}{v_{CaN}} 
            \frac{1+\left(\frac{Ca}{k_{H2}}\right)^3}{\left(\frac{Ca}{k_{H2}}\right)^3}
    \end{gathered}
\end{equation}

\noindent where $k_3=\SI{100}{\per\micro M\per\second}$,
$k_4=\SI{0.1}{\per\second}$ \citep{endo_multiple_1996}, and $v_{PKA}/v_{CaN}=1$
\citep{miller_stability_2005}.

\subsection{Turnover}\label{turnover}

The turnover of \gls{camkii} is a continuous process given by \EQ{turnover} with rate
$v_{t}=\SI{30}{\per\hour}$ \citep{ehlers_activity_2003}.

\begin{equation} \label{eq:turnover}
    \begin{gathered}
        x_ay_{6-a} \xrightarrow{v_t} x_6y_0\; \text{for}\; 6\ge a\ge 1 \\
        x_ay_{7-a} \xrightarrow{v_t} x_7y_0\; \text{for}\; 7\ge a\ge 1
    \end{gathered}
\end{equation}

\subsection{Diffusion and simulation method}\label{subsec:simulator}

Diffusion is implemented as cross voxel ``jump'' reaction. Diffusion of a
species X with diffusion-coefficient \SUB{D}{X} between voxel A and B separated
by distance $h$ is modelled by reaction $X_A \xrightleftharpoons[k]{k} X_B$
where \( k={D_X}/{h^2}\), and \([X_A]=[X_B]=[X]/2 \)
\citep{erban_practical_2007}.  Based on our own numerical results (\FIGSUPP{suppl_reac_rdme}) and
other studies \citep{isaacson_reaction-diffusion_2009,erban_stochastic_2009}, we
are confident that \( h \ge 10h_{crit}\) where
\(h_{crit}=\frac{k^+}{D_{PP1}+D_{sub}}\) is a good value.  We have \( h_{crit} \le \SI{3.2}{\nano\meter} \)
whenever $D_{PP1}+D_{sub}\ge\SI{0.5}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second}$. For all
simulations presented in main text, we maintain $h\ge h_{crit}$.  For a case
where $h$ is smaller than $h_{crit}$ in some trajectories see
\FIGSUPP[subunit_facilitates_spread]{diffusion_reduces_pp1_potency}. 

All simulations were performed using Stochastic solver (Gillespie method)
available in MOOSE simulator (\url{https://moose.ncbs.res.in}, version 3.1.4)
\citep{ray_pymoose:_2008}. This model is available
at \url{https://github.com/dilawar/SinghAndBhalla_CaMKII_SubunitExchange_2018}.
Table of parameters can be found in SI (\TABLE{si:parameters}).

\subsection{Method Validation}

To validate our implementation of diffusion, we compared trajectories of two
systems: one in a single `well-mixed' cylinder with with parameters tuned to
elicit bistable behaviour (henceforth, we call it reference bistable), and other
in a discretized cylinder as described above. We expect the later to converge to
reference bistable system. 

We put 6 \gls{camkii} holoenzymes in a cylinder of length \SI{180}{\nano\meter}
discretized into 6 voxels, separated by a distance of \SI{30}{\nano\meter}. The
long-term behaviour of discretized system was most sensitive to \SUB{D}{PP1}
(\FIG{method_validation}B) and almost independent of \SUB{D}{sub}
(\FIG{method_validation}A). The discretized system converges to reference
bistable (\FIG{method_validation}C, black dots). The sensitivity of \SUB{D}{PP1}
is due to the fact that long-time average potency of \gls{pp1} reduced with
increased \SUB{D}{PP1}
(\FIGSUPP[method_validation]{diffusion_reduces_pp1_potency}) which led to
decreased average \gls{pp1} activity and hence increased average \gls{camkii}
activity (\FIG{method_validation}C, red region). This effect is not entirely due
to numerical errors as shown in \FIGSUPP[method_validation]{diffusion_reduces_pp1_potency}. 

\begin{figure}[ht!]
    \includegraphics[width=12cm]{./PaperFigures/elifeFigure7/figure_su_long_term_effect.pdf}
    \caption{Method validation. \SUB{N}{CaMKII}=6 holoenzymes as described in
        \FIG{subunit_facilitates_spread} was put in cylinderical arena divided
        into 6 voxels separated by \SI{30}{\nano\meter}. Basal \gls{ca} label
        fixed to \SI{100}{\nano M}+$\epsilon$. Another system with same parameter set was put in a single
        `well-mixed' cylinder of same length and volume known to elicit bistable
        behaviour (henceforth reference bistable system, data not shown). 
        \textbf{(A)} For fixed \SUB{D}{PP1}=\SI{0.5}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second}, varying
        \SUB{D}{sub} does not affect \gls{camkii} activity. \textbf{(B)} On the
        other hand, for fixed
        \SUB{D}{sub}=\SI{0.5}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second} , increasing
        \SUB{D}{PP1}, increases \gls{camkii} activity. We see a bistable
        trajectory (red) which is similar to the behaviour or reference bistable
        system (data not shown). \textbf{(C)} Phase plot shows the discretized
        system converges to reference bistable system (black dots). \Gls{camkii}
        activity (simulation time=10 days) is independent of \SUB{D}{sub}, and
        only depends on \SUB{D}{PP1}.  Black dots represent bistable
        configurations with at least 4 transitions observed in 10 days long
        simulation. Thus discretized system converges to reference bistable system.
    }\label{fig:method_validation} 

    % suppl
    \figsupp[\gls{pp1} potency reduces as \SUB{D}{PP1} increases.  ]{CaMKII/PP1
        system was put into a cylinder discretized into 6 voxels of equal volume
        separated by distance \(h\)=\SI{30}{\nano\meter}.  \textbf{(A)}
        \textbf{(above)} For each voxel, trajectory of active \gls{pp1} v/s time
        is plotted in blue. \textbf{(below)} Cross-correlation matrix (Pearson
        product-moment correlation coefficient, using \texttt{numpy.corrcoef}
        function). \textbf{(B,C)} Same as \textbf{A} but with different value of
        \SUB{D}{PP1}, \SI{0.001}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second} and
        \SI{0.1}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second} respectively. \gls{pp1}
        activity reduces in all voxels with increased \SUB{D}{PP1}. The
        correlation of \gls{pp1} activity among voxels does not improve with
        increased \SUB{D}{PP1} therefore non-linear distribution of \gls{pp1} in
        voxels is unlikely to be a significant contributor to the observed loss
        of \gls{pp1} potency.  \textbf{(D)} \gls{pp1} activity decreased with
        increased \SUB{D}{PP1} but remained independent of diffusion coefficient
        of subunit (\SUB{D}{sub}). On y-axis, \gls{pp1} activity is measured as
        ratio of sum of number of all active \gls{pp1} in all voxels during the
        simulation divided by the simulation time in hours. On top, dotted blue
        line (labeled \textcolor{blue}{\SUB{D}{PP1}=0}) represents the case
        where \gls{pp1} was not allowed to diffuse. At bottom, dotted blue line
        (labeled \textcolor{blue}{1-voxel}) shows the case where the cylinder
        consists only of 1 voxel and diffusion is instantaneous i.e., it is a
        well-mixed system.  As expected, as \SUB{D}{PP1} increased, the 6 voxels
        system converged to a well-mixed system of 1 voxel of 6x volume.  Note
        that a similar effect is seen for a range of \SUB{D}{sub}, including
        \SUB{D}{sub}=\SI{5}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second}, for which
        $h_{crit}=\SI{0.33}{\nano\meter}$, satisfying the condition \(h\gg
        h_{crit}\)
        \citep{isaacson_reaction-diffusion_2009}\citep{erban_stochastic_2009}.
        (Also see Fig. \FIG{suppl_reac_rdme} and
        \nameref{sec:diff_as_gillespie}) Thus we do not expect that this is a
        numerical artifact due to our use of cross-voxel jump reactions to
approximate diffusion.
}{\includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{./PaperFigures/suppl/figure_pp1_profile.pdf}}
\label{figsupp:diffusion_reduces_pp1_potency} \end{figure}

\subsection{Table of parameters} 
\TABLE{si:parameters} summarizes parameters of our model.

\begin{singlespace}
\begin{table}[t] %[hbt]
    \caption{Table of parameters used in model.}\label{tab:si:parameters}
    \begin{tabularx}{\linewidth}{p{15mm} p{0.4\linewidth} X X}
        \toprule
        \textbf{Symbol} & \textbf{Parameter} & \textbf{Value} & \textbf{Ref}\\
        \midrule
        V\textsubscript{Spine} & Volume of Spine & 1 to \SI{5e-20}{\cubic \meter} & \citep{bartol_nanoconnectomic_2015}\\ 
        V\textsubscript{PSD} & Volume of PSD (Thickness 
                                \texttildelow\SI{100}{\nano \meter}. 
                                Surface area \texttildelow\SI{0.05}{\cubic\micro\meter}) 
                             & 1 to \SI{5e-21}{\cubic \meter} 
                             & \citep{farley_structure_2015,bartol_nanoconnectomic_2015}\\
        N\textsubscript{CaMKII} & Total CaMKII holoenzymes in PSD/Spine & 100$\pm$18 & \citep{farley_structure_2015}\\
        N\textsubscript{PP1} & Total PP1 in PSD & 4 to 20\(\times\)N\textsubscript{CaMKII} & This paper\\
                             & Total PP1 in Spine & 10 to 100\(\times\)N\textsubscript{CaMKII} & This paper\\
        I1 & Concentration of free
        I1 & \SI{0.1}{\micro M} & \citep{miller_stability_2005}\\
        V\textsubscript{CaN} & Activity of calcineurin divided by its Michaelis
        constant & \SI{1.0}{\per \second} & \citep{miller_stability_2005}\\
        V\textsubscript{CaM} & Activity of PKA divided by its Michaelis
        constant & \SI{1.0}{\per \second} & \citep{miller_stability_2005}\\
        K\textsubscript{M} & The Michaelis constant of
        PP1 & \SI{10}{\micro M} & 0.4 to 20 \si{\micro M} \citep{zhabotinsky_bistability_2000}\\
        K\textsubscript{H1} & Hill constant of CaMKII (\gls{ca})
        activation) & \SI{0.7}{\micro M} & \citep{koninck_sensitivity_1998}\\
        n\textsubscript{H1} & Hill coefficient of CaMKII (\gls{ca})
        activation) & 3 & \citep{stemmer_dual_1994}\\
        K\textsubscript{H2} & Hill constant of calcineurin (\gls{ca}
        activation) & \SI{0.3}{\micro M} & \citep{stemmer_dual_1994}\\
        n\textsubscript{H2} & Hill constant of calcineurin
        (\gls{ca} activation) & 3 & \citep{stemmer_dual_1994}\\
        k\textsubscript{1} & The catalytic constant of
        autophosphorylation & \SI{1.5}{\per\second} & \citep{hanson_dual_1994}\\
        k\textsubscript{2} & The catalytic constant of protein
        phosphotase & \SI{10}{\per\second} & \citep{bradshaw_ultrasensitive_2003,ichikawa_interactions_1996}\\
        k\textsubscript{3} & The association rate constant of PP1.I1P
        complex & \SI{100}{\micro M^{-1}\second^{-1}} &
        \citep{endo_multiple_1996,miller_stability_2005}\\
        k\textsubscript{4} & The dissociation rate constant of PP1.I1P
        complex & \SI{0.1}{\second^{-1}} & \citep{endo_multiple_1996,miller_stability_2005}\\
        k\textsubscript{x}\textsuperscript{+} & The rate of adding 
        unphosphorylated subunit x & \SI{1}{\per\second\per \SUB{N}{CaMKII}} & This paper\\
        k\textsubscript{y}\textsuperscript{+} & The rate of adding
        phosphorylated subunit y & \SI{1}{\per\second\per\SUB{N}{CaMKII}} & This paper\\
        k\textsubscript{x}\textsuperscript{-} & The rate of losing
        unphosphorylated subunit x & \SI{0.1}{\per \second} & This paper\\
        k\textsubscript{y}\textsuperscript{-} & The rate of losing
        phosphorylated subunit y & \SI{0.1}{\per \second} & This paper\\
        v\textsubscript{t} & Turnover rate of CaMKII & \SI{30}{\hour^{-1}} &
        \citep{ehlers_activity_2003,miller_stability_2005}\\
        D\textsubscript{PP1} & Diffusion coefficient of \gls{pp1} & 
        \SI{0.5}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second} & This paper and
        \citep{harvey_spread_2008}\\
        D\textsubscript{sub} & Diffusion coefficient of \gls{camkii} subunits & 
        \SI{e-5}-\SI{10}{\micro\meter\squared\per\second} & This paper \\
        \bottomrule
    \end{tabularx}
\end{table}
\end{singlespace}


%%  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS %%
\section{Acknowledgements}
We'd like to thank Marcus Benna, Stefano Fusi and Moitrayee Bhattacharyya for
discussions related to their work, Mukund Thattai for useful discussions on the
stochastic reaction diffusion methods, and Bhanu Priya for useful comments on
the manuscript. This work was funded by NCBS/TIFR and SERB JC Bose fellowship
\texttt{SB/S2/JCB-023/2016} to USB.

\bibliography{bibliography} 

\appendix
\begin{appendixbox}

% alternative row
\subsection*{Stochastic diffusion using cross-voxel reactions}\label{sec:diff_as_gillespie}

In our model, diffusion of any molecule is linear i.e., the molecules diffuse
along the axis of cylinder. The cylindrical compartment of length $L$ and radius $r$
is divided into $n$ \emph{well-mixed} voxels of length $h$ ($h=L/n$) i.e., within
a voxel, diffusion is instantaneous.  

Diffusion is implemented as cross-voxel reactions in which a molecule
\emph{jump} to its neighbouring voxels with a rate constant $k$ which is a
function of diffusion coefficient $D$ and length of voxel $h$. For example,
assume that molecule A with diffusion coefficient of $D_A$ is put into a
cylinder. We divide the entire cylinderical volume into $n$ voxels. We uniformly
distribute all molecules of A into these $n$ voxels. Any molecule from voxel $i$
(labelled $A_i$) can only jump to neighbouring voxel $i+1$ or $i-1$ with rate
$k_D^A$. This process is described by following chemical reactions (\EQ{stoch_diff}).

\begin{equation}
\begin{gathered}
    \ldots A_{i-1} \xrightleftharpoons[k_D^A]{k_D^A} A_{i}
    \xrightleftharpoons[k_D^A]{k_D^A} A_{i+1} \ldots
\end{gathered}
\label{eq:stoch_diff}
\end{equation}


%% METHOD: Stochastic diffusion.
\subsection*{Stochastic diffusion with bimolecular reaction}\label{subsec:rdme}

Consider a cylindrical arena with a bimolecular reaction $A+B \rightarrow \phi$.
Both A and B diffuses while $\phi$ does not. In our model, this reaction
resembles dephosphorylation of subunit or \gls{camkii} holoenzyme by \gls{pp1} .
If we divide the cylinder into $n$ voxels labelled 1, 2, $\ldots$, $n$, then we
have following resultant chemical system.

This system is completely described by following reactions.

\begin{equation}
    \begin{gathered}
        A_1 + B_1 \xrightarrow{k} \phi_1 \\
        A_2 + B_2 \xrightarrow{k} \phi_2 \\
        \vdots \\
        A_n + B_n \xrightarrow{k} \phi_n \\
        A_1 \xrightleftharpoons[k_D^A]{k_D^A} A_2 ,\, A_2 \xrightleftharpoons[k_D^A]{k_D^A} A_3 
            ,\, \ldots,\, A_{n-1} \xrightleftharpoons[k_D^A]{k_D^A} A_n \\ 
        B_1 \xrightleftharpoons[k_D^B]{k_D^B} B_2 ,\, 
            B_2 \xrightleftharpoons[k_D^B]{k_D^B} B_3 ,\, 
            \ldots,\, B_{n-1} \xrightleftharpoons[k_D^B]{k_D^B} B_n \\ 
    \end{gathered}
    \label{eq:discrete}
\end{equation}

\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{./PaperFigures/suppl/figure_diff.pdf}
\captionof{figure}{Summary of the stochastic reaction diffusion method employed.}
\end{center}

Where $k_D^A=\frac{D_A}{h^2}$ and $k_D^B=\frac{D_B}{h^2}$ and
$[A_1]=[A_2]=\ldots=[A_n]=[A]$, $[B_1]=[B_2]=\ldots=[B_n]=[B]$ where $[X]$ is
concentration of X.

For system described by \EQ{discrete}, as $h$ decreases, the accuracy of
method increases first after which it starts decreasing. Specifically, the
diffusion component of system become more accurate as $h$ decreases but
bimolecular reactions events starts decreasing when Gillespie method is used
\citep{gardiner_correlations_1976}. Analytical methods  suggests a lower bound on
$h$, namely $h\gg \frac{k}{D_A+D_B}$ below which the method is likely to
produce large errors \citep{isaacson_reaction-diffusion_2009}. A numerical
study \citep{erban_stochastic_2009} suggests that $h\ge 10\frac{k}{D_A+D_B}$ is
a good value to keep the errors less than 1\% in distributions.

\begin{center}
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{PaperFigures/suppl/figure_bimolecular_reac_rdme.pdf}\label{si:fig:discretization}
    \captionof{figure}{Error estimates for bimolecular reaction
        $A+B\xrightarrow{k} \phi$ where
        $k=\SI{1e3}{\meter\cubed\per\mole\per\second}$. Parameters of this
        system are similar to the reaction \EQ{dephosphorylation} in main text. 
        4 molecules of A and B each are put into a cylinder 
        of length $L$=\SI{500}{\nano\meter} and radius $r$=\SI{20}{\nano\meter}. This arena is divided into $n$
        equal subvolumes, each of length $h=L/n$.  Diffusion of A and B is implemented as described in eq.
        \EQ{discrete} in \nameref{subsec:rdme} where $D_A=D_B=D$.
        {\bf(A,B,C,D,E)} Average of 20 trajectories of A vs time (error bars are
        standard-deviation) for different combinations of $n$ and $D$. For fixed
        value of $n$, kinetics are undistinguishable from each other for non-zero
        value of $D$ (A, B and C). This suggests that the results described in 
        \FIGSUPP[subunit_facilitates_spread]{diffusion_reduces_pp1_potency} are majorly not due to 
        computational errors. For fixed value of $D$, however, changing $n$ has
        huge impact on dynamics of A (D,E) especially when there is less than 1 molecule in
        each voxel (compare plots where n=1,4 vs n=8,16). {\bf(F)} Time for A to reach zero
        ($t_0$) vs $D$ and $n$. 
    }\label{fig:suppl_reac_rdme}
\end{center}



\end{appendixbox}

\end{document}

